It was given its botanical name, Solanum tuberosum, in 1596 by the Swiss botanist Gaspard Bauhin, and belongs to the Solanaceae family, the nightshades, which includes eggplant, peppers, and the tomato. Radical swings in temperature, from highs of 62°F (17°C) to lows below freezing (most nights of the year), occur even within a twenty-four-hour period, and constantly disrupt the potato plant's physiological processes. Yet, potatoes are ideally suited to these conditions; the plant grows in even the poorest soils, and the hardiest species can survive at an altitude of 15,000 feet. When needed for sustenance during the lean months, the chuno could be reconstituted by soaking in water, then being cooked or ground into meal, with no loss of nutritional value. Eventually, it was found that potatoes grew well in the mountainous Pyrenees and along the Atlantic coast, where they were popular among Basque fishermen during their voyages to the Grand Banks of Newfoundland. Some historians claim that it was Basque fishermen who first brought potatoes to Ireland, when they came ashore to dry their catches on their return voyages from Newfoundland. Unlike modern potatoes, which contain only a nonharmful trace amount, tubers of the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries had much higher levels, not enough to cause death, but sometimes a rash appeared. In the early nineteenth century, Ludwig Feuerbach and other German radicals believed that "potato blood" was weakening the people and delaying the anticipated revolution. Even as late as 1928 in America, Celestine Eustis, the author of Cooking in Old Creole Days , advised readers to throw out the water in which potatoes had been boiled because it was poisonous. Europeans quickly discovered that the potato afforded them a military advantage; it was ideally suited to combat starvation caused by war. During the Dutch Wars (1567–1609), for example, Spanish soldiers crossed the Alps on foot from Italy, marching north through Franche Compté, Alsace , and the Rhinelands. Villagers along the route quickly discovered that tubers carried by the soldiers could be planted, hidden underground, and dug as needed, unlike grain. When French, Austrian, and Russian armies invaded Prussia during the Seven Years War (1756–1763), peasants escaped starvation by eating potatoes. The English, traditionally not fond of vegetables, based most of their meals on meat, and the potato carried a social stigma as the food of savages and peasants. Unadulterated, naked potatoes were not considered appropriate food for the upper classes, and Queen Victoria's chef carved the tubers into shapes like olives and pears, or buried them entirely in purées and soups. Potatoes did not replace meat immediately, but other staples like oats, beans, barley, herring, and bread gradually disappeared from the table. Over time, the diet shifted to one of boiled potatoes supplemented by milk, which supplied calcium and vitamins A and D, making the meal nutritionally complete. The historian William H. McNeill (1999) believes that potatoes twice made a critical difference in world history: first, in South America, where the vegetable provided the principal energy source for the Inca and their Spanish successors. Not only was it collected as taxes from the peasant-farmers, it was also disbursed from storehouses to pay labor gangs for building roads, waging war, and erecting great monuments. Once the Spaniards arrived and conquered the Inca, chuno is what fed thousands of conscript miners, forced by the conquistadors to work the silver mines in Bolivia . This tremendous influx of silver contributed to worldwide monetary inflation, and enabled Spain to build a powerful naval fleet. The extraordinary strength of the industrial, political, and military changes between 1750 and 1950 could not have taken place without an enormously expanded food supply from potatoes, which served to feed a rapidly growing population, McNeill argues. Legrand d'Aussy, in his 1782 Histoire de la vie privée des Français (History of the private life of the French) wrote that the pasty, indigestible tuber should be eliminated from aristocratic households and left to the poor. The nineteenth-century French gastronome and author of the esteemed La physiologie du goût (The physiology of taste, first published in 1825), Brillat-Savarin agreed that the tasteless potato was good only as a defense against famine. To counter the fear of anything in the nightshade family (more intense in France than in England), in 1771 the Faculté de Paris published a paper stating emphatically that the potato was innocuous. Realizing that acceptance of the potato needed to begin at the top, Parmentier is said to have convinced Louis XVI to encourage planting and eating the tuber by throwing all-potato banquets. For nineteenth-century farming life, the potato was a real boon for the same reason it became popular elsewhere as a cheap, nutritious, convenient way to feed farmhands and families. They must be able to gather sufficient water from the soil to form the starchy tubers that range anywhere from three to twenty in number on any one plant, depending on variety, weather, and conditions. In the United States, most potatoes are produced in Idaho, followed by Washington, Oregon, Maine, North Dakota , California , Minnesota , and Wisconsin. The substance that sometimes appears as a greenish cast under the skin and in the eyes of the potato is the alkaloid solanine, the natural pesticide that protects the plant as it grows. Eating unfried potatoes contributes to the minimum goal of five servings of fruits and vegetables a day, recommended by the U.S. Department of Agriculture's (USDA) Food Guide Pyramid and designed to provide optimum good health. In the following year, Connecticut valley potatoes were listed as an export, but the buyers were West Indian planters, looking for cheap food for slaves. This is how potato starch is made, which is commercially packaged to be used as a thickener and to make cakes, biscuits, puddings, pies, and sauces for Jewish Passover to fulfill the religious requirement that no flour be used in their preparation. Annoyed when Commodore Cornelius Vanderbilt (the railroad magnate) sent back his fried potatoes because they were too thick, George Crum, the chef at the Half Moon Hotel in Saratoga Springs, New York, thought he would teach him a lesson. Finding himself overstocked with old potatoes, Wise peeled and sliced them, and then followed his mother's recipe for making chips and put them in brown paper bags. To combat the threat of pest damage and fungicide-resistant blight, scientists have experimented with breeding blight-resistant germ plasm and biotechnology that involves placing a gene into an already existing variety to improve its resistance to disease, insects, or stress. There are even larger questions about whether biotechnology offers a reasonable way to feed the world's hungry; most experts maintain that the amount of food is sufficient and it is distribution that is the crucial issue. The Amazing Potato: A Story in Which the Incas, Conquistadors, Marie Antoinette, Thomas Jefferson , Wars, Famines, Immigrants, and French Fries All Play a Part . Limited choices in the supermarket and hybrid potatoes without much character or flavor have sent frustrated chefs and small growers in search of the old standbys that once made home cooking so memorable. Potato classics like pink-skinned Early Rose (1867), developed by Albert Bresee of Vermont , and creamy 1840s Peach Blow from New Jersey sell out as quickly as growers can supply them.
POTATO. Nutritionally, the potato supplies complex carbohydrates—essential for energy—and a very low amount (about 10 percent) of protein. With a world harvest of 291 million tons grown in more than 100 countries, potatoes are second only to rice as a world food crop. The potato was domesticated high in the Andes Mountains in South America by 3000 b.c.e., but it was not until the Incan civilization (ca. (Raw potatoes are 80 percent water.) As they defrosted, laborers stamped on them to press out all the moisture. When the Spanish arrived in South America around 1537, they were not impressed by the potato. Returning to Spain by way of sub-Saharan Africa, the Spanish introduced potatoes there in 1538. Leftovers from shipboard food found their way to Spain in the 1550s but, in most areas,
they did not grow well and were not popular. Through the first half of the seventeenth century, potatoes were eaten primarily by the poor and soldiers in Spain. The potato was introduced in India , possibly as early as 1615, and had reached the most remote parts of China by 1643. Since it was not mentioned in the Bible , it was often associated with the devil. In Catholic Ireland, to be on the safe side, peasants sprinkled their seed potatoes with holy water and planted them on Good Friday. Ireland was the first country in Europe to accept the potato as a field crop, in the seventeenth century, and to embrace it as a staple in the eighteenth. One acre could feed a family of six, averaging ten pounds of potatoes per person a day. As early as 1740, the potato saved Ireland from famine. Potatoes were also used to feed pigs. The second way in which the potato changed world history was in northern Europe. As in other European countries, the peasantry took to potatoes much more quickly because it could be used in their diet like turnips. By the first half of the eighteenth century, the potato was well established in France, even if it was only among the peasants. After yet another famine, Parmentier himself wrote in 1789 that, although the tuber was a nightshade, it was not soporific. It took about two hundred years—after the tubers made their way to Europe—before they were introduced into North America. By 1860, American output of potatoes was calculated at 100 million bushels, 90 percent produced by the northern states, with New York the single largest producer, followed by Pennsylvania , Ohio , and Maine . These can be planted for the next year's crop rather than using seed potatoes. Potatoes figure prominently in many of the world's cuisines, particularly in the Americas, in Europe, and in countries colonized by Europeans: pommes de terre soufflées and pommes Anna in France; hot potato salad, noodles, dumplings, pancakes, and bread in Germany; as a base for soups and puddings and stuffing for pierogi in Russia and Poland ; colcannon—a mixture of potatoes and kale, turnips, or cabbage—and cobbledy, potatoes mashed with milk, butter, salt, pepper, and onions in Ireland; as an ingredient in the Spanish omelette; in the latkes and knishes of Jewish food; for the sauce skordalia in Greece ; in raclette and roesti in Switzerland; for gnocchi in Italy; stuffed potatoes and savory causa, mashed potato cake, in Peru; for lefse, thin potato pancakes in Norway ; in fish and chips, mashed potatoes, shepherd's pie, and Cornish pasties in England; potato casserole in Finland ( Imellettyperunasoselaatikka ), a dish that undergoes a malting process wherein the starch of the potatoes breaks down to form a simple sugar; french fries, potato chips, and stuffed potatoes in the United States. Potatoes can be used in every course of a meal, even dessert. In the United States, the potato has found its way into pop culture. The exotic sweet potato was brought from Haiti to Europe as soon as it was discovered by Columbus, but it took the conquistadors more than thirty years to bring potatoes to Spain, and then they came as food for sailors. In America, where the potato did not have a class barrier to break down, its association with fat and grease—deep frying—has reinstated some of its lowly image. The irony is that, by cooking it in fat, the 99.9 percent fat-free fresh potato is transformed into a high-fat snack. In the 1870s and 1880s in both France and America, manufacturers began making equipment for deep frying, which made commercial production of fried potatoes and french fries a reality. Potato products are made from potatoes that have been reduced to powder in one of two ways. This is how potato flour is made. This is how potato starch is made, which is commercially packaged to be used as a thickener and to make cakes, biscuits, puddings, pies, and sauces for Jewish Passover to fulfill the religious requirement that no flour be used in their preparation. By 1945, he had supplied about 33 million pounds of dehydrated potatoes to the military. French's Instant Potato was introduced by the R. T. French Company in 1946. Of particular interest are heirloom potatoes, those developed over centuries for which the seeds have been handed down from one generation to the next. New York: Food Products, 1994. One Potato, Two Potato . London and New York: Elsevier, 1989.
Growing wild as early as 13,000 years ago on the Chilean coast of South America , potatoes were first cultivated by farmers in the Andes Mountains nearly seven thousand years ago. In 1653, however, the historian Bernabé Cobo made a laudatory reference to the culinary properties of chuno, describing how Spanish women were able to grind the substance into more white flour than could be obtained from wheat, and from which they made sponge cakes and pastries with almonds and sugar. So great was the fear that, when Frederick the Great of Prussia ordered his people to plant potatoes in 1744, they pulled them up. Even as late as 1928 in America, Celestine Eustis, the author of Cooking in Old Creole Days , advised readers to throw out the water in which potatoes had been boiled because it was poisonous. At the same time potatoes were feared and reviled, and being grown only in the gardens of botanists, there was also a developing literature in sixteenth-century European herbal books asserting that potatoes had some therapeutic effects. In 1778, the
War of the Bavarian Succession was called "the potato war" because most of the action consisted of destroying the enemy's food supplies. Ireland was the first country in Europe to accept the potato as a field crop, in the seventeenth century, and to embrace it as a staple in the eighteenth. The historian William H. McNeill (1999) believes that potatoes twice made a critical difference in world history: first, in South America, where the vegetable provided the principal energy source for the Inca and their Spanish successors. The second way in which the potato changed world history was in northern Europe. Legrand d'Aussy, in his 1782 Histoire de la vie privée des Français (History of the private life of the French) wrote that the pasty, indigestible tuber should be eliminated from aristocratic households and left to the poor. The nineteenth-century French gastronome and author of the esteemed La physiologie du goût (The physiology of taste, first published in 1825), Brillat-Savarin agreed that the tasteless potato was good only as a defense against famine. By 1840, the potato was well established in French cuisine, making its way in through the soup pot, where it added bulk and absorbed flavors. To counter the fear of anything in the nightshade family (more intense in France than in England), in 1771 the Faculté de Paris published a paper stating emphatically that the potato was innocuous. The Larousse Gastronomique, the encyclopedia of French cuisine, first published in 1938, contains dozens of classic French recipes for potatoes. While potatoes migrated from South America to Europe, they failed to travel out of South America to North America or even to Central America and Mexico. The first North American colonial potato growing dates from 1719, when Irish immigrants, escaping starvation from the famine, introduced the potato to New Hampshire . A major step forward in potato cultivation was made in 1872 when the botanist Luther Burbank discovered that the Early Rose potato produced a seed ball, and was able to breed plants with larger tubers whose yield sometimes doubled or tripled that of its parent. These potatoes are cut into what are called "sets," small pieces, with at least one eye or leaf bud on the surface, with some of the flesh of the potato still attached to supply the initial energy for the plant. Potatoes figure prominently in many of the world's cuisines, particularly in the Americas, in Europe, and in countries colonized by Europeans: pommes de terre soufflées and pommes Anna in France; hot potato salad, noodles, dumplings, pancakes, and bread in Germany; as a base for soups and puddings and stuffing for pierogi in Russia and Poland ; colcannon—a mixture of potatoes and kale, turnips, or cabbage—and cobbledy, potatoes mashed with milk, butter, salt, pepper, and onions in Ireland; as an ingredient in the Spanish omelette; in the latkes and knishes of Jewish food; for the sauce skordalia in Greece ; in raclette and roesti in Switzerland; for gnocchi in Italy; stuffed potatoes and savory causa, mashed potato cake, in Peru; for lefse, thin potato pancakes in Norway ; in fish and chips, mashed potatoes, shepherd's pie, and Cornish pasties in England; potato casserole in Finland ( Imellettyperunasoselaatikka ), a dish that undergoes a malting process wherein the starch of the potatoes breaks down to form a simple sugar; french fries, potato chips, and stuffed potatoes in the United States. The substance that sometimes appears as a greenish cast under the skin and in the eyes of the potato is the alkaloid solanine, the natural pesticide that protects the plant as it grows. Until there is more evidence, the World Health Organization and the United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization have not been able to determine whether consumers should cut back on their intake of fried potato foods, particularly chips. Eating unfried potatoes contributes to the minimum goal of five servings of fruits and vegetables a day, recommended by the U.S. Department of Agriculture's (USDA) Food Guide Pyramid and designed to provide optimum good health. A "couch potato" is a sedentary person; "hot potato" indicates a volatile issue or topic; "small potatoes" refers to something that is not a big deal; a "meat and potatoes" person is someone who eats only the basics. The exotic sweet potato was brought from Haiti to Europe as soon as it was discovered by Columbus, but it took the conquistadors more than thirty years to bring potatoes to Spain, and then they came as food for sailors. For a long time, the potato continued to be regarded as food fit only for the poor and as animal fodder, useful only in the event of starvation. By 1848, about half a dozen varieties of potatoes were being grown commercially, the same number grown in the twenty-first century. In the 1870s and 1880s in both France and America, manufacturers began making equipment for deep frying, which made commercial production of fried potatoes and french fries a reality. Derivatives of potato flour include instant mashed potatoes, frozen potato products, and potato chips. This is how potato starch is made, which is commercially packaged to be used as a thickener and to make cakes, biscuits, puddings, pies, and sauces for Jewish Passover to fulfill the religious requirement that no flour be used in their preparation. The first large-scale production of dehydrated potatoes began in 1942, when the potato processor John Richard "Jack" Simplot, already the nation's largest shipper of fresh potatoes, won a government contract to supply dried potatoes to the armed forces during World War II. The Food and Drug Administration ruled that chip products not made from fresh potatoes must be labeled "potato chips made from dried potatoes." For example, resistance to the Colorado potato beetle has been placed into the Russet Burbank potato by inserting genetic material from the bacterium Bacillus thuringiensis into the plant. The Shepody variety of potato has been improved to make it more resistant to viruses, one of the major causes of declassification of seed in the potato industry. Monsanto's NewLeaf potato is the first genetically engineered potato, designed to protect it from the Colorado potato beetle. There are even larger questions about whether biotechnology offers a reasonable way to feed the world's hungry; most experts maintain that the amount of food is sufficient and it is distribution that is the crucial issue. Many observers believe that the solutions to the agricultural issues lie in plant breeding and preserving the
genetic diversity of potatoes. Of particular interest are heirloom potatoes, those developed over centuries for which the seeds have been handed down from one generation to the next. To protect the genetic diversity of the potato, and to make it available for systematic manipulation, the International Potato Center in Lima, Peru, under the auspices of the Consultative Group on International Agricultural Research, has collected about 5,000 samples of native cultivars from nine countries in Latin America , representing about 3,500 genotypes. See also Biotechnology ; Central Europe ; Columbian Exchange ; Distribution of Food ; Fast Food ; French Fries ; Genetic Engineering ; Germany, Austria, Switzerland ; Hamburger ; Ireland ; Scurvy ; Snacks ; Sweet Potato ; Vegetables . While the discussion over genetic diversity in crop potatoes has polarized the agricultural community today in much the same manner as the finger-pointing during the 1850s over the causes of the 1840s potato blight, market forces are quietly building new niches for time-tested heirloom varieties.
